README.md, before:

# Inboxable

The Inboxable gem is an opinionated gem that implements the **Transactional Inbox** pattern for Rails applications. The gem provides support for both ActiveRecord and Mongoid. If you are using the **Transactional Outbox** pattern in your application, you can use the [Outboxable](https://github.com/ditkrg/outboxable) to handle both ends of the pattern.

Please take into consideration that this Gem is **opinionated**, meaning it expects you to follow a certain pattern and specific setting. If you don't like it, you can always fork it and change it.

_**Note:**_ If you are not familiar with the **Transactional Outbox and Inbox** patterns, please read the following article [Microservices 101: Transactional Outbox and Inbox](https://softwaremill.com/microservices-101/) before proceeding.

## Installation

Add this line to your application's Gemfile:

```ruby
gem 'inboxable'
```

And then execute:

    bundle install

Or install it yourself as:

    gem install inboxable

## How It Works

The inboxable gem uses a cron job to poll the inbox for new messages. The cron job is scheduled to run every 5 seconds by default. The cron job will fetch the messages from the inbox and process them in batches. The number of messages to be processed in each batch is 100 by default. In the event of a failure, the message will be retried up to 3 times with a delay of 5 seconds between each retry. If the message is still not processed after 3 attempts, the message will be moved to the dead letter queue. Note that all the previous values can be configured using the configuration options. (See the [Configuration](#configuration) section below for more information.)

## Usage

The installation command above will install the Inboxable gem and its dependencies. However, in order for Inboxable to work, you must set up your application to use Inboxable gem to process the inboxes. The following sections will show you how to set up your application to use Inboxable gem.

The below command is to initialize the gem and generate the configuration file.

```sh
rails g inboxable:install --orm <orm>
```

The gem provides support for both ActiveRecord and Mongoid. The `--orm` option is used to specify the ORM that you are using in your application. The `--orm` option can be either `active_record` or `mongoid`. Here is an example of how to generate the configuration file for an application that uses ActiveRecord.

```sh
rails g inboxable:install --orm active_record
```

The above command will generate the following files:

  1. `config/initializers/inboxable.rb`: This file contains the configuration for the gem. (See the [Configuration](#configuration) section below for more information.)
  2. `app/models/inbox.rb`: This file contains the `Inbox` model. This model is used to store the messages in the inbox. (See the [Inbox Model](#inbox-model) section below for more information.)
  3. If you are using ActiveRecord, the following migration file will be generated:
       - `db/migrate/<timestamp>_create_inboxable_inboxes.rb`: This migration file is used to create the `inboxes` table in the database. (See the [Inbox Model](#inbox-model) section below for more information.)

### Generating Handler Files & Processors

The Inboxable gem provides generators that can be used to generate event handler files and processors. Here is how to generate the files.

#### Generating Handler Files

The following command is used to generate the handler files.

```sh
rails g inboxable:handler --handler_name <handler_name> --namespace <namespace>
```

The options are as follows:

- `handler_name`: This option is used to specify the name of the handler. An example of a handler name is `user_update_handler`.
- `namespace`: This option is used to specify the namespace for the handler class. The namespace must be in the format `<namespace1>::<namespace2>`. For example, if the namespace is `Common::UsersApi`, the handler file will be generated in the `app/handlers/common/users_api` directory.

#### Generating Processor Files

The following command is used to generate the processor files.

```sh
rails g inboxable:processor --processor_name <processor_name>
```

The options are as follows:

- `processor_name`: This option is used to specify the name of the processor. An example of a processor name is `user_update_job`.

## Inbox Model

The Inbox model is used to store the messages in the inbox. The Inbox model is generated by the gem when you run the `rails g inboxable:install --orm <orm>` command. Based on the ORM that you are using, the gem will generate the appropriate model. The following is the structure of the Inbox model for ActiveRecord and Mongoid.

### Fields & Attributes

The Inbox model has the following fields and attributes:

---
| Field | Type | Description |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `route_name` | String | The routing key that is used to route the message to the appropriate handler. |
| `postman_name` | String | The name of the postman that delivered the message. |
| `payload` | String | The payload of the message. |
| `event_id` | String | The ID of the event. It is used for idempotency. |
| `attempts` | Integer | The number of attempts tried to process the message. |
| `last_attempted_at` | Time | The time of the last attempt to process the message. |
| `processor_class_name` | String | The name of the processor class that is used to process the message (a Sidekiq worker class). |
| `metadata` | Hash | The metadata of the message. |
---

### Methods

The Inbox model has the following methods:

---
| Method | Description |
| --- | --- |
| `increment_attempt` | Increments the number of attempts to process the message. |
| `process` | Processes the message by enqueuing the processor class to Sidekiq. |
| `check_threshold_reach` | Checks if the maximum number of attempts to process the message is reached. If so, it sets the status of the message to `failed` and stops processing the message. |
| `check_publishing` | Checks if the message is already processed. If so, it stops processing the message. |
---

### Flow

When an event is received by the Rails application, the Handler class should ensure that this message is delivered to the inbox by creating a new record in the inbox. After the record is created, the Inbox model tries to process **once** the job by enqueuing the processor class to Sidekiq. If the job fails, the `Inboxable::PollingReceiverWorker` will retry the job up to 3 times with a delay of 5 seconds between each retry. If the job is still not processed after 3 attempts, the job will be moved to the dead letter queue.

## Configuration

The Inboxable gem provides a number of configuration options that can be used to customize the behavior of the gem. The following is a list of the configuration options that are available.

---
| Option | Description | Default Value    | Applied To                                           |
| --- | --- |------------------|---|
| `orm` | The ORM that is used in the application. | `:active_record` | `/config/initializers/inboxable.rb`                  |
|`INBOXABLE__CRON_POLL_INTERVAL` | The interval in seconds between each poll of the inbox. | `5`              | Can be overridden by providing an environment variable with the same name. |
|`INBOXABLE__CRON` | The cron expression that is used to poll the inbox. | `*/5 * * * * *`  | Can be overridden by providing an environment variable with the same name. |
|`INBOXABLE__BATCH_SIZE` | The number of messages to be processed in each batch. | `100`            | Can be overridden by providing an environment variable with the same name. |
|`INBOXABLE__MAX_ATTEMPTS` | The maximum number of attempts to process a message. | `3`              | Can be overridden by providing an environment variable with the same name. |
|`INBOXABLE__RETRY_DELAY_IN_SECONDS` | The delay in seconds before retrying to process a message. | `5`              | Can be overridden by providing an environment variable with the same name. |
---

## Contributing

Bug reports and pull requests are welcome on GitHub at <https://github.com/[USERNAME]/inboxable>. This project is intended to be a safe, welcoming space for collaboration, and contributors. Please go to issues page to report any bugs or feature requests. If you would like to contribute, please fork the repository and submit a pull request.

To, use the gem locally, clone the repository and run `bundle install` to install dependencies. Then, run `bundle exec rspec` to run the tests.

## License

The gem is available as open source under the terms of the [MIT License](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT).

Commit message:

Adds docs to configure Inbox model configuration

README.md, after:

# Inboxable

The Inboxable gem is an opinionated gem that implements the **Transactional Inbox** pattern for Rails applications. The gem provides support for both ActiveRecord and Mongoid. If you are using the **Transactional Outbox** pattern in your application, you can use the [Outboxable](https://github.com/ditkrg/outboxable) to handle both ends of the pattern.

Please take into consideration that this Gem is **opinionated**, meaning it expects you to follow a certain pattern and specific setting. If you don't like it, you can always fork it and change it.

_**Note:**_ If you are not familiar with the **Transactional Outbox and Inbox** patterns, please read the following article [Microservices 101: Transactional Outbox and Inbox](https://softwaremill.com/microservices-101/) before proceeding.

## Installation

Add this line to your application's Gemfile:

```ruby
gem 'inboxable'
```

And then execute:

    bundle install

Or install it yourself as:

    gem install inboxable

## How It Works

The inboxable gem uses a cron job to poll the inbox for new messages. The cron job is scheduled to run every 5 seconds by default. The cron job will fetch the messages from the inbox and process them in batches. The number of messages to be processed in each batch is 100 by default. In the event of a failure, the message will be retried up to 3 times with a delay of 5 seconds between each retry. If the message is still not processed after 3 attempts, the message will be moved to the dead letter queue. Note that all the previous values can be configured using the configuration options. (See the [Configuration](#configuration) section below for more information.)

## Usage

The installation command above will install the Inboxable gem and its dependencies. However, in order for Inboxable to work, you must set up your application to use Inboxable gem to process the inboxes. The following sections will show you how to set up your application to use Inboxable gem.

The below command is to initialize the gem and generate the configuration file.

```sh
rails g inboxable:install --orm <orm>
```

The gem provides support for both ActiveRecord and Mongoid. The `--orm` option is used to specify the ORM that you are using in your application. The `--orm` option can be either `active_record` or `mongoid`. Here is an example of how to generate the configuration file for an application that uses ActiveRecord.

```sh
rails g inboxable:install --orm active_record
```

The above command will generate the following files:

  1. `config/initializers/inboxable.rb`: This file contains the configuration for the gem. (See the [Configuration](#configuration) section below for more information.)
  2. `app/models/inbox.rb`: This file contains the `Inbox` model. This model is used to store the messages in the inbox. (See the [Inbox Model](#inbox-model) section below for more information.)
  3. If you are using ActiveRecord, the following migration file will be generated:
       - `db/migrate/<timestamp>_create_inboxable_inboxes.rb`: This migration file is used to create the `inboxes` table in the database. (See the [Inbox Model](#inbox-model) section below for more information.)

### Generating Handler Files & Processors

The Inboxable gem provides generators that can be used to generate event handler files and processors. Here is how to generate the files.

#### Generating Handler Files

The following command is used to generate the handler files.

```sh
rails g inboxable:handler --handler_name <handler_name> --namespace <namespace>
```

The options are as follows:

- `handler_name`: This option is used to specify the name of the handler. An example of a handler name is `user_update_handler`.
- `namespace`: This option is used to specify the namespace for the handler class. The namespace must be in the format `<namespace1>::<namespace2>`. For example, if the namespace is `Common::UsersApi`, the handler file will be generated in the `app/handlers/common/users_api` directory.

#### Generating Processor Files

The following command is used to generate the processor files.

```sh
rails g inboxable:processor --processor_name <processor_name>
```

The options are as follows:

- `processor_name`: This option is used to specify the name of the processor. An example of a processor name is `user_update_job`.

## Inbox Model

The Inbox model is used to store the messages in the inbox. The Inbox model is generated by the gem when you run the `rails g inboxable:install --orm <orm>` command. Based on the ORM that you are using, the gem will generate the appropriate model.The following is the structure of the Inbox model for ActiveRecord and Mongoid.

If you would like to use a different name for the Inbox model. You can configure it by setting the `inbox_model` config to the name of you custom defined model. See the [Configuration](#configuration) section below for more information.

### Fields & Attributes

The Inbox model has the following fields and attributes:

---
| Field | Type | Description |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `route_name` | String | The routing key that is used to route the message to the appropriate handler. |
| `postman_name` | String | The name of the postman that delivered the message. |
| `payload` | String | The payload of the message. |
| `event_id` | String | The ID of the event. It is used for idempotency. |
| `attempts` | Integer | The number of attempts tried to process the message. |
| `last_attempted_at` | Time | The time of the last attempt to process the message. |
| `processor_class_name` | String | The name of the processor class that is used to process the message (a Sidekiq worker class). |
| `metadata` | Hash | The metadata of the message. |
---

### Methods

The Inbox model has the following methods:

---
| Method | Description |
| --- | --- |
| `increment_attempt` | Increments the number of attempts to process the message. |
| `process` | Processes the message by enqueuing the processor class to Sidekiq. |
| `check_threshold_reach` | Checks if the maximum number of attempts to process the message is reached. If so, it sets the status of the message to `failed` and stops processing the message. |
| `check_publishing` | Checks if the message is already processed. If so, it stops processing the message. |
---

### Flow

When an event is received by the Rails application, the Handler class should ensure that this message is delivered to the inbox by creating a new record in the inbox. After the record is created, the Inbox model tries to process **once** the job by enqueuing the processor class to Sidekiq. If the job fails, the `Inboxable::PollingReceiverWorker` will retry the job up to 3 times with a delay of 5 seconds between each retry. If the job is still not processed after 3 attempts, the job will be moved to the dead letter queue.

## Configuration

The Inboxable gem provides a number of configuration options that can be used to customize the behavior of the gem. The following is a list of the configuration options that are available.

---
| Option | Description | Default Value    | Applied To                                           |
| --- | --- |------------------|---|
| `orm` | The ORM that is used in the application. | `:active_record` | `/config/initializers/z_inboxable.rb`                  |
| `inbox_model` | The name of the Inbox model. | `Inbox` | `/config/initializers/z_inboxable.rb`                  |
|`INBOXABLE__CRON_POLL_INTERVAL` | The interval in seconds between each poll of the inbox. | `5`              | Can be overridden by providing an environment variable with the same name. |
|`INBOXABLE__CRON` | The cron expression that is used to poll the inbox. | `*/5 * * * * *`  | Can be overridden by providing an environment variable with the same name. |
|`INBOXABLE__BATCH_SIZE` | The number of messages to be processed in each batch. | `100`            | Can be overridden by providing an environment variable with the same name. |
|`INBOXABLE__MAX_ATTEMPTS` | The maximum number of attempts to process a message. | `3`              | Can be overridden by providing an environment variable with the same name. |
|`INBOXABLE__RETRY_DELAY_IN_SECONDS` | The delay in seconds before retrying to process a message. | `5`              | Can be overridden by providing an environment variable with the same name. |
---

## Contributing

Bug reports and pull requests are welcome on GitHub at <https://github.com/[USERNAME]/inboxable>. This project is intended to be a safe, welcoming space for collaboration, and contributors. Please go to issues page to report any bugs or feature requests. If you would like to contribute, please fork the repository and submit a pull request.

To, use the gem locally, clone the repository and run `bundle install` to install dependencies. Then, run `bundle exec rspec` to run the tests.

## License

The gem is available as open source under the terms of the [MIT License](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT).
